Good morning, everybody.
I hope you guys had a nice lunch,
a good nap, or a session,
depending on how awake you were.
And hey, that wasn't a joke.
So we're here going to talk about
WebObjects and creating web services.
This is session 6.2.4.
If any of the above sounded wrong,
you're probably in the wrong room.
As our nice,
friendly voice of God introduced me,
I'm Karl Hsu.
I work in WebObjects engineering,
and I'll be doing the first
half of this presentation.
The second half of the presentation
will be done by my compatriot,
Ron Lue-Saang.
He's the friendly Jamaican-Chinese guy.
So we have to have the obligatory
what you will learn in this
session slide because...
They told us.
All right.
So web services.
We're going to talk very briefly
about what a web service is.
In our case,
when we talk about web services,
we're going with a stricter definition.
I mean, technically,
web services is anything where
you invoke services over the web,
but we're going to specifically talk
about the standards-based web services
that WebObjects provides and uses.
We'll talk a little bit about
practical applications of web services,
why you would use web services in
lieu of just a regular HTTP Connect or
Corbo or anything else like that.
Then, finally,
we get to the meat of the matter.
We'll talk about WebObjects
and web services,
WebObjects as a server,
WebObjects as a client, and finally,
about the crown jewels for web services
and WebObjects direct to web services.
Hopefully, that will be a relief to those
of you who have been going to the
WebObjects sessions and not actually
hearing a whole lot about WebObjects.
So in a single sentence,
what are web services?
Web services are remote procedure
calls for the internet era,
and they're XML-based.
The goal, I think,
in that one sentence was to hit as many
little buzzwords as you possibly can.
It'll sound great to managers, IT people.
It's fantastic.
There are a bunch of standards and specs
in the official web services sphere.
There's description of the
web service in the WSDL,
which is the
Web Services Description Language.
There's discovery of a web service,
how you find what web services
exist and how do you find
the information about them,
and that's the UDDI,
which stands for something
I can't remember.
Universal Discovery Definition
and Interface or Interrogation,
something like that.
Nobody calls it that.
Nobody remembers what it's called.
Everybody just says UDDI.
So when you hear that
buzzword floating around,
you know what it is.
Ah, that's discovery.
The encoding of the web service itself.
When you send XML back and forth,
you have to agree on a particular
way that the XML will look.
That's SOAP,
the Simple Object Access Protocol.
And finally, the transport.
When you send the XML and receive it,
you have to do it over something,
over the wire, whatever.
And those vary.
That's probably the most flexible
part about the whole thing.
But the two most common,
the two that are defined
in the spec itself,
are HTTP and SMTP.
WebObjects in particular
mostly deals with HTTP.
So let's go a little bit over
the parts of a web service.
When people talk about a web service,
they typically talk
about three major parts.
There's the WSDL, and the WSDL, the WSDL,
is a contract.
It defines everything
about your web service.
You can sort of think about it
as the interface to a class.
When you publish a web service,
you publish the WSDL to it,
and that's what the client uses to
know how to talk to the web service.
There are a number of tools out there
that can also use the WSDL to generate
stub classes and so on and so forth.
The service itself consists of a set of
operations and invocation information.
It's the, again, in an analogy,
it's the class itself.
It can hold state or
whatever you need it to do.
The operations exist within a service.
That's something to keep in mind.
A single service can
have multiple operations.
It's sort of a grouping,
because a service exists
at a certain point.
It exists at a certain URL,
and then you can invoke multiple
operations at that point.
Those are analogous to methods.
Let's take a quick look at the WSDL.
It's the Web Services Definition
Language.
It's also defined in XML,
and it basically defines everything
you need to invoke a web service.
It's the structure of
the web service itself.
It defines data types that
are used in the web services,
not only the standard
set of data types - ints,
strings, dictionaries,
whatnot - but also custom data types
that you may have for your web service.
EO Global IDs, whatever.
It defines message types - requests,
responses, error messages,
anything that you might send,
what you're supposed to send,
and what you might get back.
It talks about the available
operations on that web service.
What can you do with it?
Can I add something?
Can I--
You know, invoke a particular method
that will return some status,
whatever.
It's all in there.
It defines where that
service is actually located,
the URL or address that you
would invoke that web service at.
And finally,
it talks about the transport bindings.
Most of the time,
for WebObjects in particular,
that will be HTTP.
Let's talk a bit about SOAP.
It's the Simple Object Access Protocol.
This is basically the protocol.
When you send the XML across the wire,
you can think of this a little bit
like the meta-schema for what you're
actually going to send across.
It defines the language in which
you will define your web service.
It splits up the message layout itself.
So each SOAP envelope will then have a
header in which you can stuff ancillary
information about the web service itself.
In a particular invocation, for instance,
it might include routing information
or session-based information.
And then the body itself,
which is where the bulk of
the data that's going back and
forth across the wire is kept.
The SOAP standard defines
several transport protocols,
HTTP and SMTP,
but it leaves it open for plug-in.
They're not tied to a
particular protocol.
You could conceivably write a web
service that required somebody to
write down the XML on a piece of paper,
run to your neighbor's house,
and give it to them and run back.
It wouldn't be very effective,
but it would technically be within spec.
Just to show you,
just because it's a spec
doesn't mean that it works.
It's, you know, a lot like statistics.
It supports synchronous
and asynchronous modes.
You can do the standard sort of HTTP way.
You send a response.
The service does whatever it's doing,
and then it sends you the - I'm sorry,
you send a request.
I'm sorry, I'm not worthy.
You send a request, it gets processed,
and it sends a response.
There are also asynchronous
modes in which the server may
poll a client for a request or
for data and so on and so forth.
An interesting thing at this
point is that there are two
major styles of web service.
There's an RPC style of web service,
and there's a document
style of web service.
Most people, I think,
would like to be using an RPC style.
The RPC style is invoked very
much like a remote procedure call.
That would be RPC.
You invoke a method,
you pass arguments in a particular order,
and you get back a response.
Document style is a
little bit more flexible,
but it's also more annoying.
It's more work.
You essentially say,
"I'm going to send you XML soup
in some privately-defined format.
You muck with it and send me back more
XML in a privately-defined format,
and we'll kind of negotiate it
there." This actually negates
a large point of web services,
which is easy negotiation and
easy understanding of what you're
actually sending and receiving.
So this is a really quick example.
I mean, you can sort of see,
if I wanted to find an RPC service,
it's very analogous to
a class and a method.
You receive optional arguments,
you return something.
In the case of a document service,
you just get, basically, in our case,
you would get a DOM tree,
and you would have to return
something very similar.
So, problems solved by web services.
The major bonus of web service is that
it's very clean information transfer.
There are a number of services out there,
Watson, for instance, where,
at least initially,
I'm not sure about now,
the whole point was that
it would screen scrape.
It would hit a website,
get back the HTML,
and it would have to then parse its way
through the HTML looking just for the
information that you're looking for.
That's bad because it means--it
means that if they decide to
change the look of the site,
if they say, "You know what?
We're gonna do something nice.
We're gonna put an ad here.
We're gonna move this search field
around," or something like that,
you're totally bored, right?
And sites change all the time.
Part of the point is that, you know,
the display is fluid.
It also means that it doesn't
dictate any sort of display or usage.
You can expose the information,
you expose the service,
and the client can do
whatever they want for it.
They can present it
directly back to the user.
They can aggregate it.
They can do whatever you want.
Another important thing is that
it's implementation dependent.
The spec tries to be as clean as possible
so that the server doesn't have to
know anything at all about the clients.
And this is what really separates it
in large part from custom solutions,
things where you just agree on a private
format between you and the client.
In this case,
you don't need to know anything
about the client if you're
the server or vice versa.
It tries to be fluid in a
way that the spec tries to
encompass pretty much anything.
So you can have WebObjects written
in Java running on Mac OS X,
talking to Pearl running on Linux,
or C# running in a .NET-- as a
.NET client on a Windows machine.
And you don't have to know what that is.
As long as you can talk
the web services talk,
it goes back and forth,
and everybody's happy.
And finally,
one of the reasons it was created this
way is that it's firewall-friendly.
Unlike older iterations,
of things like Corbo and such,
you don't have to open
up any funny ports.
You don't have to do anything
interesting to make your system
administrator really unhappy.
You basically punch a hole.
You know, you no longer have to punch
a hole through anything.
You can just route it right
through your web server the
way that you would normally.
And because it fits that well,
that well onto this sort
of Internet standard,
it makes things much easier to use.
The best part about it, though,
is that it's human-readable.
This actually isn't a
very complicated thing.
I think the best description that
I've ever heard of this is the fact
that the SOAP XML is human-readable
does not actually guarantee
that it is readable by humans.
So you could, in fact,
you could conceivably encrypt
it or something like that.
It doesn't really matter.
I mean, the goal is that you wouldn't
actually have to look at it.
One of the goals of things like web
services is that the XML is well-defined.
XML is well-understood.
The SOAP spec that defines how the
XML is structured is well-understood,
and it becomes very easy for
you to write tools so that
machines can talk to machines.
It doesn't - it's written in XML.
It's done in XML so that
there are a number of tools
available to read and write it,
not so that you can
actually do this by hand.
Please, if you do, though,
it would be really
interesting to hear about it.
Okay, hold on a second.
It should be obvious by now.
Participants in a web service,
you have a server and you have a client.
Often they're called a
provider and a consumer.
It's just a different name for it.
Shouldn't have to worry about it.
Theoretically,
what ends up happening is the
server will write the web service.
They then register with some
sort of universal directory,
and then they publish the WSDL to that,
in a way that's described
in the directory.
So you would go to the
directory and you would look up,
"I want web services that do,"
let's say something really lame,
"add two numbers together."
And you would get a list of
URLs for contact information and
WSDL locations for those services.
And then you could hit those services,
take a look at the WSDL that came back,
run your client automation thing,
and now you can talk.
Finally, of course,
the server has to provide
the web service itself.
The client does the opposite.
It has to look up the web
service in a directory.
It will then configure
itself using the WSDL,
and it can invoke the web service.
The configuration using WSDL can
be either dynamic or static.
There are a number of tools out
there that will generate stubs.
WebObjects,
the default implementation for
WebObjects doesn't do that.
In fact,
it just retrieves the WSDL and then
tries to be sort of nice about it.
Very quickly, we'll go over this.
This is a little bit more specific.
This sort of is looking at the
web service event flow from
a WebObjects point of view.
And I'm not going to talk about
the client side because it's
essentially a mirror image of
what happens on the server.
So the client sends its WSDL request.
The server returns the
WSDL to the client.
The client will then - I mean,
this can happen offline.
You can cache the WSDL,
you can keep it in a file,
use it to generate stubs or whatever.
That happens - could happen right
before the request and have the
client dynamically do something to
generate the proper SOAP request.
Sometimes it happens much earlier.
So now the client sends a SOAP request.
The server gets it as XML.
In WebObjects, we unmarshall the
XML into a set of objects,
native types.
We process it.
We marshal the response back into XML.
and we return the response to the client.
Again, it's very simple.
So let's begin talking about
WebObjects and web services.
WebObjects uses Axis for its
engine to do web services.
It's the Apache Extensible
Interaction System.
I don't know why it's called that,
because it doesn't seem to have anything
to do with what it actually does.
It's written by the Apache group.
It's open source.
It has support for both
the client and the server,
and it has automatic WSDL generation.
We basically stuffed it directly in.
WebObjects does do some
nice stuff for you.
It has plug-ins for both session
support and custom serialization
and deserialization of objects.
In particular,
all of the basic objects that
WebObjects is likely to use,
all of our NS collection
classes and the EOs themselves.
And of course,
on top of the Access Engine,
we wrote our coup de grace,
the direct web services.
And we'll talk about that later.
Actually, he'll talk about that later.
So things that we do to you,
specifically the deserializers
that we have are for NSArray,
data, dictionary, range, time zone,
enterprise objects, and global ID.
In a WebObjects application
and on the client,
they are automatically
registered for you.
We also provide WSDL for these.
We also provide - this is
actually one thing that we do
that should be really nice.
It's session support.
We have the custom session
handlers installed on both the
client and the server side.
One major lack in the SOAP 1.1
spec is that it doesn't talk at
all about transaction semantics.
There's no way to carry on a
conversation about web services.
When they define the spec,
they sort of assume that each web service
would be nice and sort of self-contained,
that the answer from one invocation
would have nothing to do with
the request of another one.
We felt this was a major lack,
particularly when we were
trying to deal with databases.
So what we added was we extended the
session support in WebObjects to support
sessions through web services so that
you can invoke a web service and have a
- and store server-specific web services.
side state.
Can anybody else say
that three times fast?
I can't.
That's okay.
The other thing we add,
and this is pretty minor,
is just dynamic registration.
Access is configured typically
through a set of XML files,
and we typically don't like to do that.
So we provided the
WoW Web Service Registrar.
It's a single call that you can
use to register a web service.
Okay.
So really quickly,
I'm just going to run through the demo.
So we have a demo server,
and you can see Session
Test Service is the name of my service.
The service class itself is
not terribly complicated.
[Transcript missing]
Text Editing, Syntax Coloring,
and Text Editing.
Here we go.
Sorry about that.
Please forgive me.
I know not what I do.
Ah, there we go.
This is about as simple of
a service as you can get.
We get the current context,
the WebObjects context.
We get the session.
And in our session,
we just store an array of strings,
basically, so that as we send,
each time we add to that list.
And finally, application.
Here's that single line that
I was talking about to register.
I've actually registered the
session under a different name,
session test, just to see, you know,
it's doable.
Okay.
The client is going to
be a little bit simple.
What the client is going to do is
it's just going to be-- a front
end is going to be a WebObjects
application with a text field.
You're going to add in, type in a string,
hit Enter, and as a response,
we're going to send back the list
of previously submitted strings.
This is obviously a very
trivial application.
So, web service client,
we can get the web service client,
so on and so forth.
All right, so let's run these suckers.
One thing to keep in mind at this point
is that the client - because what I want
to do is I want to show you what's
happening on the client through something
called TCP Monitor just to prove that
we're actually going across and so
you can see what the state looks like.
I've actually stored the
WSDL locally on the machine,
and it looks like this.
You can see here, state test response,
state test return, it returns an array.
The request takes a string.
The name of the service is
the Session Test Service.
The operation is named the State Test,
and it takes a string,
returns the response,
takes a request, returns a response.
Those are the message types
that I was talking about.
All right.
So let's hook this up.
[Transcript missing]
Sorry,
is the font still too small for this?
You can see it's a very simple one.
You have the SOAP envelope itself,
which defines all of the namespaces.
You have the body and the
string itself encoded.
On the way back,
Again, the envelope.
Here's where the session
support comes in.
We start sending the session.
We send the information in the header.
You can see that we have the session ID,
for those of you who are
familiar with WebObjects,
and the instance ID.
In our case, at this point,
since we're running directly,
there's no instance ID at all.
If you walk through the rest of them,
it's the same request.
You can see that we're
simply returning an array.
Okay, back to slides.
Let's talk a little bit about
the client really quick.
It's basically a very thin
convenience API on top of Access.
While on the server side,
we added direct web services,
we didn't add anything quite that
complex on top of the client side.
The custom deserializers and
serializers are available.
They're registered.
The session support is registered.
For security,
you can do HTTPS on the client side to
connect using the standard Java APIs.
Going forward, talking about security,
currently,
the current state of the art for
web services security in terms of,
The only way to secure connections
is pretty much just HTTPS.
That's fine.
It works pretty well.
There is an industry standard,
WS Security.
It's been basically Microsoft, IBM,
all the big people are behind it.
WebObjects doesn't support
that at this point,
unfortunately.
We do provide a security
delegate that will get invoked at
pretty much every single phase,
before the response is sent,
after the response is sent,
before and after marshaling,
so that at any point you can
hook in and ask WebObjects to
do whatever needs to be done.
And finally,
so I'd like to introduce Ron Lu-Saeng.
He's our Jamaican-Chinese
WebObjects Engineering Cowboy.
Man, I hao ma.
Man.
You know, your hat's out of date.
It's already obsolete.
Yeah, it's Panther time now.
I can only find a
Panther-colored cowboy hat.
So thanks, Karl.
Now that Karl has told us everything
we need to know about web services
and how WebObjects leverages
access to support web services,
I'll just take the next 20
minutes or so and tell you
about our kick-ass technology,
direct-to-web services.
So let's see.
Actually, let's go to black first.
I'll just talk a little
bit about three things.
Three things, basically.
First,
what is it that Direct Web Services is
trying to address?
What problem is it trying to address?
And also, what technologies went
into Direct Web Services?
And then I'll give you a cool demo
that has a WebObjects application
talking to a Cocoa desktop
application via web services.
So what problem is it that
Direct Web Services solves?
Basically,
we in the WebObjects department believe
that our developers write too much code.
And by that, I mean they write too much
application-specific code.
They should really be-- we
want our developers to have
simple lives and simply work on
fine-tuning their business logic.
So to that end,
we've come up with these rapid
development technologies.
And if you're familiar with
direct-to-web or direct-to-Java client,
then you're probably familiar with the
rule system that we have in WebObjects.
With direct-to-web services,
we've extended that and added
to it the access and WebObjects
support for web services,
and also our fantastic
Enterprise Objects framework,
and wrapped that in the
rule system that we have.
If you haven't heard of our rule system,
it's basically a question and answer
system that lets you infer values from
a set of rules and some contextual info.
That way,
you can have a really dynamic application
where a set of rules instead of lots of
code defines your application behavior.
So the problem that
we're trying to solve is,
sure,
right now you can build a WebObjects
application pretty easily that
will vend your business logic
as a web service using Access,
WebObjects, and EOF.
But you still have to write some code.
And usually that code does
one of four things-- create,
read, update, or delete a bunch of
rows from your database,
typically called
[Transcript missing]
Let's see.
All right.
And so then on to what technologies
went into direct web services.
So Karl's already told you about Axis,
which does all the heavy lifting
of SOAP messaging for us.
And he's also told you about how
WebObjects adds session support and,
of course,
all the load balancing that you expect
from WebObjects as an application server.
So between Axis and WebObjects,
we already have a great
way to talk web services.
Then on the low end, we also have the
Enterprise Objects Framework,
which we believe is the best
way for accessing and modifying,
interacting with business data in
your JNDI or JDBC data sources.
So, and of course, again,
wrapping all of this in the
smarts that is the rule system,
we've put together our kick-ass
crown jewel technology,
direct-to-web services.
So I'm just going to go to the demo now.
Can we get demo two, please?
Cool.
Just going to start a new project.
Just like all of our
direct-to-star projects,
we have a project template
called direct-to-web-services.
And we'll give it a cool name.
And we'll add a business logic
framework that I've already built.
All right.
Navigational problems, sorry.
Okay.
And we'll just go ahead and
build and launch the application.
So along with the project templates,
we also have assistants.
Every direct-to-web application,
direct-to-Java client applications,
and now also direct-to-web services
have assistant applications that
you use to configure the rules for
your application as a first step for
specifying behavior of your application.
So while that's starting up, let's see.
So it'll bring up a little web browser,
which isn't entirely useful
for a web services application,
but it tells you that.
It tells you you should really put
this URL in the web services assistant,
which I'll do here.
So now the Assistant is going
to connect to our application,
and it can already look at all of the
models that are in our application,
as you can see here.
And it can also see all of the
services that are already published.
By default,
we have an aptly named service,
the WoW default web service
already set up for us.
We'll go ahead and enable it,
and we'll make one of
these entities public.
And over here you can see the service
is already populated by default.
Every time we add an entity,
we add a few operations
that do all of those CRUD,
all the CRUD work I talked about earlier.
Specifically, inserting, searching,
updating, deleting.
And we also look through the fetch
specifications for your model.
So we find things like my
named fetch specification
for find user and login user.
Just so you can see what
I'm talking about here,
[Transcript missing]
So this is an important thing.
Right now, we're exposing your business
logic as a web service.
So clients can go and examine the
WSDL that's generated from the service.
And you don't want them to
necessarily have a really good
idea of how your data is modeled.
So you can change the names
to be something less sketchy
for public consumption.
So now we'll test this operation.
and we'll send the changes that we've
made in the Assistant back to the server,
and it'll be updated in
the rule system there.
So now we can look for all users
with a first name starting with R.
Poof, we do get one user.
Some of this text may be
a little hard to read,
but--
You'll see that there's a key
value coding null value here.
Don't worry about that.
What's actually happening is
we're sending back a serialized
EO without the passkey,
as you saw me configure earlier.
On the client side here,
because this is also using
WebObjects technology,
we can actually create a
real EO on the client side,
but it doesn't have the passkey set yet.
So if we don't want to see
these values in our client,
or especially if our client is
in a WebObjects application,
we can go ahead and turn
on returning SOAP struct.
This makes it a little bit cleaner
for non-WebObjects clients.
Alternatively, it makes it a little less
efficient for WebObjects clients,
so there's a trade-off there.
Actually, let's go ahead and add
messages as a public operation.
You can see we've created
some operations here.
Let's go ahead and turn on
the insert message operation.
We don't want clients to automatically
create the creation date for the
messages that they're inserting,
so we'll take that out.
We'll just say we need a subject,
a recipient to send it to by address,
and let's add the sender's
address and a message.
And then for return values,
we don't really need to return anything.
Just insert it and be done with it.
Then we'll enable the operation,
turn on SOAPstruct returning
just for the heck of it.
And let's try this out.
Ah, OK.
Forgot to change this.
Because we've gone and
reverse-engineered kind of the
fetch specification in my model,
I actually choose the names for the
key value bindings in the model,
which are not very kosher as
far as web services names go.
So I'll go ahead and
change these as well.
And so you notice there,
we can actually do a little bit
of validation for you to make sure
that you're not going to end up
publishing a WSDL that isn't valid.
So again, let's go back and test the
insert message operation.
Let's take a look at the
WSDL for this service,
the entire service, just for fun.
This is the sort of thing that we don't
want you guys to have to worry about.
This is precisely the sort of thing that
Direct Web Services handles for you.
It will dynamically figure out
what parameters you set as input
and output parameters and merge
those into a WSDL for your service.
Let's say hello to Karl from me.
Wait for it, Karl.
Okay.
And we get an exception.
So what's happened here is it claims
that the creation date is... Yeah,
so we got an exception.
So now we know that we need
to start debugging our app.
All right.
Yes, I believe this was expected,
but this isn't the exception I expected.
So, in any case,
I can move on to starting
up an application that...
[Transcript missing]
I've gone ahead and turned
off WoW Auto Open in
Browser and set the port.
I'll also add a couple of
rules to our rule model file.
This part I want to emphasize.
For editing rules in your application,
please add a new file.
and name it d2w.modelfile
like I've named it here.
So you'll get this.
Edit this file.
Do not edit the user.d2wmodelfile,
which is edited by the assistant for you.
They're two separate files.
You should edit the
d2wmodelfile with rule editor.
So what I'm going to do
is change the location
[Transcript missing]
is so I can show you all of
the cool XML that goes back and
forth through a TCP monitor.
[Transcript missing]
Connect.
We'll still connect through 8.8.8.8.
We could connect through 7.7.7.7,
but then you'd get a little
bit more garbledy-gook.
All right.
And here we can search
for all of our users.
So one of the things that I've
already gone and done is change
the return type for arrays.
You can change how things get
serialized out simply by adding a
call to the WoW Web Service Registrar.
What I've done is make the
XML that we return simpler and
more Cocoa web services friendly.
That's why the client
here didn't like it.
So I'm going to add this to one of the
download sites after this conference
so you can actually try this code out.
Basically, we tell it that if we're
serializing out an array,
it should serialize it out with the
UR type instead of as SOAP_ENC_ARRAY.
So we can dynamically change how
things are serialized and deserialized,
as well as which serializers get used.
And another thing...
Thanks to our dynamic deployment stuff,
we can change how the response is encoded
as far as the entire SOAP message.
One of the things I'm going to
do in order to make this more
friendly for Cocoa Web Services is
add my Cocoa response handler
here into the response chain.
By copying this line
into the response bit,
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so I have a few classes in here
that were generated by WSMakeStubs,
which is located in /developertools,
which takes a bunch of WSDL and
generates some Objective-C or
AppleScript or one other,
I believe just CF code,
that lets you invoke the
web service really easily.
You don't have to write
as much of this stuff.
I'm going to make sure
that I use a valid name.
[Transcript missing]
So here our server is running,
so we'll hide that.
And we'll get rid of this.
Basically,
what this Cocoa application will do,
one of the things it can do is log in to
Log into our web service
using just a simple name and
password and find a global ID.
This global ID, then,
you can pass back as a key to
other web services invocations.
Similarly,
you could conceivably return a session
ID or something else like that that
lets the following operation invocations
do something more intelligent,
kind of contextual information.
So here's my app.
What I'll do is I'll check my email.
There's nothing there.
That's fine.
Let me try sending Karl a message.
Let's take a look at the
important debugging tool,
TCP Monitor.
TCP Monitor debugging . Oh,
I've done something very silly and not
included... This in my build target.
Hang on.
So we'll give this one more try.
And that definitely seems to have worked.
Let me check first.
Oh, OK.
So here we've gone across-- let me
check again so you don't miss it-- and
sent a clear text name and password.
Don't do this.
and replied with a bunch of messages
that are encoded specifically for Cocoa.
You could do this for any other client.
Dotnet has worked.
We could do this for regular
AppleScript clients as well.
And if I send myself a message--
We can see that we first log in,
finding the name of the recipient here.
And getting the global ID.
This is an encoding of a global
ID so that we can use it later
when we send the actual message.
So this is a two-step process
for this specific web service.
Here you can see we've sent a global
ID for the recipient and the sender.
And I can check my mail again.
and see that we indeed
did get the message.
One of the other things that
Karl alluded to was session support
and how that enables transactions
for direct web services and
WebObjects web services in general.
You'll notice when I check
the service panel here,
we have a little checkbox for
allows transactions or not.
With that enabled,
We can go and check any of
these and look in the WSDL.
There will be three extra operations.
Begin and commit and roll
back transactions operations.
This way,
a web service client can explicitly
ask for session state to be kept on the
server for the remaining transactions.
Once they initiate a begin
transaction operation,
sending simply begin
transaction to the server,
we keep the session alive,
reply with some session
headers in the SOAP message,
which the client hangs onto.
Simply forwarding those message
headers to the server awakens the
correct session for the client.
So you can do things like keeping
a bunch of changes in the editing
context on the server going,
keep making changes without
committing them to the database
until a commit transaction is sent.
So that's it.
And I think that was all.
Oh, as far as extending the
frameworks here -- how much time?
Extending the framework,
you can see we have all the default
services and default operations.
You can also create your own.
You can see you can create a
new service and change its name.
As well as creating a
new operation for it.
We bring up a new operation dialogue.
Name the operation and define
which entity it works with.
All of these changes are saved
in the rule system so that simply
by invoking an operation by name,
WebObjects will automatically
know what entity the operation is
meant for and whether it should be
inserting or deleting or updating
new records in the editing context.
So we can add a search user
operation named "Have Fun,"
change the parameters and...
Let's play with any of these
settings until we get it just right,
at which point we might want
to actually make some small
tweaks into how it's working.
At that point,
we can actually freeze the operation.
This generates real source code.
We can name the operation "source."
And then we go and generate
the source for you.
For everything that you would need for
actually doing what is done by default.
We also generate a static
WSDL page that you can edit.
So we've generated a lot of code,
and it does the same thing.
Boring.
Next, I'd like to simply--
I'd rather just subclass the
existing operations and only tweak
the little things that I need,
rather than having to
manage a set of source.
If I really needed it,
this would be useful, but in my case,
I typically just want to change the
return object by one little amount.
So instead of freezing an operation,
I can create a new operation here,
name it a simple subclass.
And same settings.
And you'll notice that once we
froze the previous operation,
we can no longer edit any of
these arguments and return values.
So you have to get it
right before you freeze it.
You can unfreeze,
but you still have to throw
out your original source.
When we subclass,
you'll see we still get the dynamic
system here in order to configure
arguments and return types.
Now,
subclassing involves one little thing.
There is a template that
ships with WebObjects,
and it lives in developer, documentation,
WebObjects, web services, templates.
I'm going to simply copy that with
this cute little script I wrote.
I'm going to copy that into
Developer Project Builder Extras,
File Templates, WebObjects.
Just read the directions
in the readme here.
So now that I've copied
that template there,
I can go and create a new--
Direct-to-Web
Service Operations subclass.
We'll name it...
And you can see now we have
something much simpler than this,
but it does pretty much the same thing.
All you need to do is tell the - or
define your operation to subclass
one of our other operation types,
search or insert or delete operation.
This one is going to be a search service,
search operation, and here I can -
[Transcript missing]
One of the things that we
get when we're invoked,
when an operation is invoked,
is a set of input part values.
These are the values that the client
has actually sent to the server.
And we'll also have to
register this service,
this operation, with the rule system.
The way we do that is editing, again,
the D2W model file.
And we'll say,
When the operation name that's
invoked is... Say hello.
Don't ask me where I come
up with these names.
I don't know either.
Then the operation class that should
be invoked is my happy-happy class.
And a very similar rule needs to
be used in order to tell the rule
system that it is a dynamic operation.
Oh, I didn't need to do that.
Copy-paste is a wonderful thing.
Okay, so Operation Class Name is set.
Is Operation Frozen is set to false.
Save, stop, and build.
And then we can go back to the Assistant,
disconnect, wait for the application
to warm up again,
and then once we've connected,
we can start configuring this new
operation that you'll see there.
[Transcript missing]
And you can see we can
still edit the arguments,
return types,
and which service it's associated with,
whereas the frozen one
is still just frozen.
We'll go ahead and add
subject and a recipient as...
"Input parameters and change these,
and the creation date, and the sender.
So lots of little parameters."
Oh, I have to make these public.
Another security feature reminding
you that you must make these things
public before anybody can invoke them.
So we can at least set the subject.
We'll probably get an exception
saying that we don't have the
serializer for the response type,
but here you can see on the server
side that we did in fact get some
input part values that we can
futz with before invoking super.
So this way we still don't have to do
all of the work of actually inserting
or searching or deleting or whatever.
We can just tune little parameters
of the operation to suit our needs.
And with that,
I'd like to go back to the slides.
That's it.
Direct web services,
web services made easy,
based on the Access and WebObjects
support for web services,
using EOF so that you don't have
to write any of the CRUD code,
and using the rule system to
define the parameters and the
behavior of your application.
With that,
I'd like to bring Karl back up.
Another demo, but I did that one.
There we go.
Back, back.
Thank you, Ron.
So, running a little short on time.
That's okay.
Let's talk really quick.
There are some deployment
considerations when you're deploying
web services through WebObjects.
He talked about, a little bit,
about session support and load balancing.
We do support multiple instances of
WebObjects vending web services and
then load balancing between them.
The key to that, though,
is that the load balancing
is based on cookie support.
The client--we basically send
which instance you should be
talking to back as an HTTP cookie.
So the client has to be
able to understand that and
vend it back to us properly.
Otherwise, the whole transaction session
thing breaks down entirely.
So that's one thing to keep in mind.
The WSDL location,
you generally want to simply
publish a single WSDL.
It's nice that we
dynamically generate it,
and it means it's easy to change,
but it's probably best if you simply
put it up on a web server and then
reference it directly from there.
It probably shouldn't change all
that often because a lot of people do
things like generate stubs off of it.
So if you change it,
you will break the client.
Finally, we talked about registration.
UDDI was designed to be
this sort of analog to DNS,
or the phone book,
where all sorts of web services
operations would register
in this gigantic directory
that was all over the world,
and everybody would look up stuff there.
So far, it hasn't really caught on.
It's beginning to build
a little bit of momentum.
It's in the GH2EE 1.4 spec, and so on.
But it's still not this giant--
and the original authors had intended.
In lieu of that, a lot of companies use
web services internally,
and in order to publish
their web services,
they either have an internal UDDI server
- there are a number of free UDDI servers
out there - or they do something
simple like the web page or something
like the way XMethods would do it.
Or just word of mouth - you
send an email out saying,
"Hey guys, I've published a web service.
The WSDL kit is available at blah."
So web services, in two words,
even less than the one sentence,
it's Internet RPC.
It has lots and lots
and lots of acronyms.
Hopefully you know a little
bit more about them now,
but that's okay.
The goal for us, of course, was that,
you know, much of that could be skipped,
that we would try to do as much
of that as possible for you.
They would like it to be located
and registered in a UDDI server,
and because we're
talking about standards,
we're kind of going to
go in that direction.
It's described by the WSDL.
It's sent as SOAP-encoded
XML over HTTP or SMTP,
snail mail, carrier pigeon, whatever.
Hey, don't knock the carrier pigeons.
They were very efficient and cheap.
You try laying a T1 line
versus getting a bird.
So WebObjects itself,
at a very fundamental layer,
very basically adds
transactions and type support.
And that's good.
That's helpful.
The big thing for us is that
we add direct-to-web services.
And this is something
I really want to stress.
Direct-to-web services
provides you with automatic,
comprehensive,
and very easy-to-configure web
services for your entire database.
You no longer have to go through and
figure out what you need to write,
how do I access this, how do I expose it.
You basically point direct-to-web
services at your database,
bring up the assistant,
do a little bit of clicking and
pointing and checking and unchecking,
and you can expose your entire
database with transaction support.
It looks transparent to people.
They can say, "Let's start a transaction.
Add some stuff, modify some things,
set up some relationship.
When you're done,
check if everything's working.
Check if everything's in a good state.
If so, commit.
If not, roll it back.
It's beautiful.
I believe, actually,
that it's even better than
something like direct-to-web.
When you build something
like direct-to-web,
you're generating a UI.
And then you have to tweak
the UI so it looks good,
so it fits in with your site
and everything else like that.
With direct-to-web services,
it's just the information.
Your database is exposed directly.
It can be used by multiple clients.
It can be used by clients
you've never heard of.
It can be used by clients you
don't know or don't recognize,
can't read.
It's that easy.
And it's something that we would really,
really like people to take advantage of.